[devdocs] Batch System Developer Docs (#13427)
hail-is/hail: dev-docs/batch-system.rst

- Container Registry

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Kubernetes Services
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*******
Gateway
*******

Gateway is a Kubernetes service that is a load balancer that is
managed by the cloud provider. It is associated with a statically
known external IP Address. This is the entry point in which external
users send requests to the Batch system such as submitting batches and
getting information on their jobs. There is a an NGINX server behind
the load balancer that forwards requests to the appropriate service.

****************
Internal Gateway
****************

Internal Gateway is a Kubernetes service that is a load balancer that
is managed by the cloud provider. Unlike the Gateway, the Internal
Gateway is associated with a statically known **internal** IP address
that is only accessible from virtual machines within our private
network. This endpoint is how Batch worker VMs are able to talk to the
Batch Driver Kubernetes Service directly without going through the public
internet.

******************
Auth / Auth-Driver
******************

The Auth Kubernetes service is responsible for creating new users,
logging in existing users, and directing requests to the correct

> service in the cluster. We will soon be changing how authentication /

Author: totally not what I meant -- sorry, I must have gotten distracted.

   and have resources to run jobs.
5. The Batch driver schedules jobs to run on the active workers.
6. The worker VM downloads the job specification from cloud storage,
   downloads any input files the job needs from cloud storage, creates
   a container for the job to execute in, executes the code inside the
   container, uploads any logs and output files that have been
   generated, and then notifies the Batch driver that the job has
   completed.
7. Once all jobs have completed, the batch is set to complete in the
   database. Any callbacks that have been specified on batch
   completion are called.
8. Meanwhile, the user can find the status of their batch through the
   UI or using a Python client library to get the batch status, cancel
   the batch, list the jobs in the batch and their statuses, and wait
   for the batch or an individual job to complete. The implementation
   of the wait operation is by continuously polling the Batch Front
   End until the batch state is "complete".

~~~~~~~~~~
Data Model
~~~~~~~~~~

The core concepts in the Batch data model are billing projects,
batches, jobs, updates, attempts, and resources.

> A **billing project** is a mechanism for imposing cost control and
> enabling the ability to share information about batches and jobs
> across users. Each billing project has a list of authorized users and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **billing project** is a mechanism for cost accounting, cost control, and
enabling the ability to share information about batches and jobs
across users. Each billing project has a list of authorized users and
```

Billing projects are like credit cards or some other account to which we can assign a bill. I agree they also serve as a locus of cost control.

**updates**. Each update contains a distinct set of jobs. Updates are
distinct submissions of jobs to an existing batch in the system. They
are used as a way to add jobs to a batch. A batch is always created
with 0 updates and 0 total jobs. To add jobs to a batch, an update
must be created with an additional API call and the number of jobs in
the update must be known at the time of the API call. The reason for
this is because an update reserves a block of job IDs in order to
allow multiple updates to a batch to be submitted simultaneously
without the need for locking as well as for jobs within the update to
be able to reference each other before the actual job IDs are
known. Once all of the jobs for a given batch update have been
submitted, the update must be committed in order for the jobs to be
visible in the UI and processed by the batch driver.

A job can have **attempts**. An attempt is an individual execution
attempt of a job running on a worker VM. There can be multiple
attempts if a job is preempted. If a job is cancelled before it has a
chance to run, it will have zero attempts. An attempt has the
**instance** name that it ran on, the start time, and the end

> time. The end_time must always be greater than the start_time. All

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time. The end time must always be greater than the start time. All
```
Consistency with previous sentence. Prefer no underscore since this is narrative instead of code.

billing tracking is done at the level of an attempt as different
attempts for the same job can have different resource pricing if the
VM configurations are different (4 core worker vs 16 core worker).

Billing is tracked by **resources**. A resource is a product (example:
preemptible n1-standard-16 VM in us-central1) combined with a version
tag. Each resource has a rate that is used to compute cost when
multiplied by the usage of the resource. Resource rates are in units
that are dependent on the type of resource. For example, VM rates are

> measured in mCPU*hours. Each attempt has a set of resources associated

Reviewer: Google's rates are posted in core-hours, ours are in msec-mcpu, which are you referring to here?
```suggestion
denominated in USD per core-hour. Each attempt has a set of resources associated
```

batch, getting the status of a job, listing all the batches in a
billing project, and listing all of the jobs in a batch. There are
usually 3 copies of the batch front end service running at a given
time to be able to handle requests to create jobs in a batch with a
high degree of parallelism. This is necessary for batches with more
than a million jobs.

**************************************
Flow for Creating and Updating Batches
**************************************

The following flow is used to create a new batch or update an existing
batch with a set of job specifications:

1. The client library submits a POST request to create a new batch at
   ``/api/v1alpha/batches/create``. A new entry for the batch is
   inserted into the database along with any associated tables. For
   example, if a user provides attributes (labels) on the batch, that
   information is populated into the ``batch_attributes`` table. A new
   update is also created for that batch if the request contains a
   reservation with more than 1 job. The new batch id and possibly the
   new update id are returned to the client.

2. The client library submits job specifications in 6-way parallelism

>    in groups of 100 jobs for the newly created batch update as a POST

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   in groups of jobs, called bunches, for the newly created batch update as a POST
```

   request to
   ``/api/v1alpha/batches/{batch_id}/updates/{update_id}/jobs/create``. The
   front end service creates new entries into the jobs table as well
   as associated tables such as the table that stores the attributes
   for the job.

3. The user commits the update by sending a POST request to
   ``/api/v1alpha/batches/{batch_id}/updates/{update_id}/commit``. After
   this, no additional jobs can be submitted for that update. The
   front end service executes a SQL stored procedure in the database
   that does some bookkeeping to transition these staged jobs into
   jobs the batch driver will be able to process and run.

The flow for updating an existing batch is almost identical to the one
above except step 1 submits a request to
``/api/v1alpha/batches/{batch_id}/updates/create``.

There are also two fast paths for creating and updating batches when

> there are fewer than 100 jobs at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all jobs fit in a single HTTP request. At time of writing, our client code uses this path
when there are fewer than 1,024 jobs and the specifications fit in fewer than 1KiB.
```

their jobs run, we use the following fair share algorithm. We start
with the user who has the fewest cores running. We then allocate as
many cores as possible that are live in the cluster until we reach the
number of cores the next user has currently running. We then divide up
the remaining cores equally amongst the two users until we reach the
number of cores the next user has running. We repeat until we have
either exhausted all free cores in the cluster or have satisfied all
user resource requests. The query to get the number of ready cores in the fair
share algorithm is fast because we aggregate across a global table
``user_inst_coll_resources`` that has a limited number of rows
maintaining counts of the number of ready cores per instance
collection and user.

**********
Autoscaler
**********

At a high level, the autoscaler is in charge of figuring out how many
worker VMs are required to run all of the jobs that are ready to run
without wasting resources. The simplest autoscaler takes the number of
ready cores total across all users and divides up that amount by the
number of cores per worker to get the number of instances that are

> required. It then spins up a maximum of 10 instances each time the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
required. It then spins up a configurable number of instances each time the
```
It's currently 2 actually.

autoscaler runs to avoid cloud provider API rate limits. This approach

> works well for large workloads that have long running jobs. It is not
> very efficient if there's many short running jobs and the driver
> cannot handle the load from a large cluster or the workload is large
> but runs quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
works well for large workloads that have long running jobs.

The autoscaler can produces more cores than the scheduler can keep
busy with work. This happens when there are many jobs with a short
execution time.
```
I get what you mean by efficiency but I think it's not obvious in this context that you're referring to minimizing the fraction of non-rented worker cores.

   fair share order. Do another pass over the result set where we
   assign each job a scheduling iteration which represents an estimate
   of which iteration of the scheduler that job will be scheduled in
   assuming the user's fair share.
4. Sort the result set by user fair share and the scheduling iteration
   and the regions that job can run in. Aggregate the free cores by
   regions in order in the result set. This becomes the number of free
   cores to use when computing the number of required instances and
   the possible regions the instance can be spun up in.

*********
Scheduler
*********

The scheduler finds the set of jobs to schedule by iterating through
each user in fair share order and then scheduling jobs with a "Ready"
state until the user's fair share allocation has been met. The result
set for each user is sorted by regions so that the scheduler matches
what the autoscaler is trying to provision for. The logic behind
scheduling is not very sophisticated so it is possible to have a job
get stuck if for example it requires 8 cores, but two instances are
live with 4 cores each.

Once the scheduler has assigned jobs to their respective instances, in

> groups of 50, the scheduler performs the work necessary to grab any

Reviewer: Is groups of 50 referring to grabbing secrets or assigning jobs to instances?

Reviewer: I thought the worker asked the driver to read the secrets for it; how is the scheduler code involved in secret reading?

Author: the scheduler calls `schedule_job` which prepares the job config with the secrets filled in that is then sent to the worker.

appropriate resources for that attempt into the database.

MJC is a database operation that is initiated by the worker VM when
the job completes. The worker sends the start and end time of the
attempt along with the resources it is using. If the attempt does not
exist yet, we create the attempt and subtract the free cores from the
instance in the database. We then update the job state to the
appropriate completed state if it is not already and not been
cancelled or completed already. We then update the start and end times
of the attempt to that given by the worker. We then find all of the
children of the completed job and subtract the number of pending
parents by one. If the child job(s) now have no pending parents, they
are set to have a state of Ready. We also check if this is the last
job in the batch to complete. If so, we change the batch state to
completed. Lastly, we execute a separate database query that inserts
the appropriate resources for that attempt into the database.

When we are looking at overall Batch performance, we look at the
metrics of SJ and MJC rates per second for heavy workloads (ex: 1000s

> of no-op true jobs). We should be able to handle 80 jobs per second,
> but the goal is ultimately 200 jobs per second.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of no-op true jobs). We historically scheduled at 80 jobs per second. We
endeavor to schedule much faster.
```

Reviewer: Do we have a particular 200 jobs/s goal?

described above and are marked as Cancelled in the database and
handled accordingly one by one.

Once a batch has been cancelled, no subsequent updates are allowed to
the batch.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~
Batch Workers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Workers are Python web servers running on virtual machines. The Python
web server activates itself with the Batch driver and then accepts
requests to execute jobs. Jobs can take the form of either Docker Jobs
or JVM Jobs. The Docker Jobs are regular jobs that use a user-defined
image and the user-defined source code. JVM jobs are specially
designed for the Query on Batch (QoB) use case. The worker downloads
an approved JAR file to execute a user's query that is stored in cloud
storage. All containers the worker creates are by using `crun` and not
Docker. When the worker has not received any work to do and no jobs
are currently running, it will deactivate itself and shut itself down.

~~~~~~~~~~~~
Known Issues
~~~~~~~~~~~~

- The current database structure serializes MJC operations because the
  table ``batches_n_jobs_in_complete_states`` has one row per batch
  and each MJC operation tries to update the same row in this

>   table. This proposal aims to fix this performance bottleneck while
>   implementing job groups.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  table.
```
